# NYT Connections Solver

An attempt to solve the NYT connections through word-vector embeddings and some ideas of my own.

## What is the goal of this project? 
To solve the New York Times connections game. Some context: New York Times connections is a game where you are given 16 words, and you have to categorize these 16 words into 4 groups of 4, each of which are unified by a single idea.

## Lets define our problem
So where do we even begin? What makes a group good and what makes it bad? I invite you to think about this problem. 

In order to solve this problem, let us imagine how a Connections puzzle might be created:
1. The puzzle creator chooses a topic.
2. They choose four words associated with that topic.
3. They repeat this another 3 times.
Okay, well, how does this help us? It gives us a framework to think about this in terms of probability. When picking a topic, I think we can both agree that a topic like "sports" is more likely to exist vs. a topic like "quantum topology", which indicates to me that topics are drawn from a distribution, lets call it P(t|NYT). And if I told you to say the first thing that came to mind when I say "sports", we can both agree that it is far more likely that we would hear the word "ball" vs. "poetry", which tells me that there exists a distribution P(word | topic) that is in some way proportional to our abstract idea of relatedness. 

For any 4 words, the Posterior can be written as P(topic | Group) = P(t) Product (P(word | topic)) However, we have two extra conditions, the first is that there are 16 words total, so the probability that these 4 words were generated by this topic and the other 12 words were not can be expressed as follows:$$P_{N}(G|t) = \text{P(t)} \prod_{\text{w}\in \text{G}} \text{P(w|t)} \prod_{\text{w}^*\in \text{V}\backslash \text{G}}\left( 1-\text{P(w}^*\text{|t)} \right)$$The second is that only these 4 words were generated by this topic. Which, is not actually captured by the above probability. You can confirm this yourself by working out Sum over all possible groups Sum over all topics P(t) * Product w in G P(w | topic) Product w ex G (1-P(w* | topic)) and seeing that in general it is not equal to 1. In order to account for this extra condition, we will introduce a normalization factor $\text{K(t)}= \left(\sum_{\text{|G|=4}} P_{N}(G|t)\right)^{-1}$
$$\text{P(Group)} = \sum_{\text{t}\in \text{topic}} K(t)*P_{n}(G|t)$$
which finally lets us express the probability of a given solution as $$\text{P(solution)}=\prod_{\text{G} \in \text{S}} \text{P(G)}$$
However, throughout this whole explanation, I have left out one crucial detail: How do we find P(w|t) and P(t). This is the crux of any attempt to solve NYT Connections, but it is not like we are without options:
The simplest solution would be take a Connection puzzle creators and have them do something like rank word similarity for each word. Unfortunately, its also entirely unfeasible. So maybe, instead we we analyze all the previous NYT connections puzzles and their solutions, the data is clean and well labeled. The issue however, is that this dataset is small and uninformative, since solutions are not repeated. Maybe instead of just the puzzle creators, we expand our survey to more people. This idea is not bad, and there are several experimental setups that come to mind(have an addendum describing some of these), however, unfortunately, is outside the scope of this project. And unfortunately, existing similarity datasets are not sufficient for our purposes either. So our final hope is that we can use text data, like wikipedia, and hope that we can find P(word | topic) and P(topic) to a first order approximation.

But can text data approximate P(w|t) and P(t)? I would argue it isn't all that far fetched. When you write a sentence you will often aim to convey an idea. For example, you might want to convey the topic sadness, you are more likely to use words like "blue", "rain", and "x". Now I want to make simplifying assumptions:
1. That the learned P(w|t and source: text) and P(t | source: text) from textual data approximates P(w|t)
	1. A corollary of this assumption is that grammatical structure has a minimal effect on P(w|t)
2. That each passage of text has a dominant topic that occurs with probability P(t)
3. That P(w|passage) ~= P(w|dominant topic)
Given these assumptions there exists non-negative matrix factorization of the joint wise probability matrix $\text{M} = \text{W}\text{W}^\text{T}$ where $\text{W}_{i}= \sum_{\text{topics}}\text{P(w|topic)}\sqrt{ \text{P(topic)}}*\hat{\text{t}}$ however, it is not unique, but is equivalent up to a global rotation. There are assumptions that can be made to lift this degeneracy, like anchor words. Unfortunately, as before, both due to lack of resources, but also because I enjoy the challenge, I opted to use pre-trained GLoVe vectors instead of factoring the joint probability matrix directly. Now my hypothesis is that what GLoVe factorizes is some version of the PMI matrix*, this isn't exactly unfounded in reality, in-part because there is some evidence that other methods like SGNS factorize the PMI matrix, and it is speculated that representations are roughly isomorphic for large enough datasets. Assuming that this is what is being factored by GLoVe, then, since most entrees are uncorrelated, the factorization of the PMI matrix can be expressed as $\sum_{\text{topics}}\left( -1+\frac{\text{P(w|topic)}}{\text{P(w)}} \right)\sqrt{ \text{P(topic)} }\hat{\text{t}}$ to a first order approximation. An appealing interpretation is that $\sum_{\text{topics}}\text{PMI(word, topic)}\sqrt{\text{P(t)} }\hat{\text{t}}$ however, this does face issues under scrutiny. While most likely $\langle\vec{\text{w}},\hat{\text{t}}\rangle \approx \left(-1+\frac{\text{P(w|t)}}{\text{P(w)}}\right)\sqrt{ \text{P(t)} }*\text{C}$, there is no way for us to uniquely determine $\sqrt{ \text{P(t)} }\text{C}$ without further simplifying assumptions or prior information about $\text{P(w|t)}$. And there is a distinct possibility that a matrix of some other form with similar properties is being factorized, as the trivial solution $c^* = 0$ was the only one I find numerically for the following equation $-1+\sum \text{P(w)}\exp(\text{c}^*\langle\vec{\text{w}},\hat{\text{t}}\rangle)=0$ for multiple found topic vectors. But it can also imply that we are not justified in making the approximation $(-1+\frac{\text{P(w|t)}}{\text{P(w)}}) \approx \ln\left( \frac{\text{P(w|t)}}{\text{P(w)}} \right)$, that our found P(w) are not good enough, or that our found unit vectors are not accurate enough. Ultimately, here I admit defeat for now, and will blindly use the softmax function to approximate P(w|t) (just normalize P(w|t) = P(w)exp(wvec dot that) * (1/norm), where norm(t) = $\sum_{w}\text{P(w)}\exp(\langle\vec{\text{w}},\hat{\text{t}}\rangle))$.


As for exact topic vectors being used, I attempt to approximate them through the following method: Take a word I'm interested in decomposing. Look at the words that have the largest dot product over the corpus(for simplicity I will say that I just take the top N, but I am open to a different method). I take these top N vectors and find a do an SVD with an L1 regression, the purpose for this, is to counteract the fact that the top N vectors are not necessarily all corresponding to the same idea, and instead of binary clustering, I prefer to instead weigh each vector on how confident I am that it is in that group. I then "subtract" out that idea unit vector out of my word and all other words(I am project and subtract, so I "eliminate" it from the global pool). Rinse and repeat. The SVD of our matrix will not give us these topic vectors. (explain why) If we take the dot product of all word vectors and this potential topic vector we get a weight distribution. For $\left( -1+\frac{\text{P(w|t)}}{\text{P(w)}} \right)\sqrt{\text{P(t)}}$ we would expect a couple things:
#1 The distribution is non-symmetric. 
	Minimum bound $\in$ (-1, 0)
	Maximum bound $\in$ (0, $\frac{1}{P(w)_{max}}$)
#2 $\sum_{i} \text{P(w}_{i})\langle\vec{\text{w}_{i}},\hat{\text{t}}\rangle$ = 0

What we observe is that our distributions short tail minimum ~=-2, a mean of zero and a long tail maximum. This does not exactly fit the distribution we would expect, as the minimum cannot be greater than -1. However, It is possible that because of the fact that $\vec{W}_{glove} = \vec{W}_{\text{left}} + \vec{W}_{\text{right}}$ that all weights are multiplied by a constant factor 2, but even then it is strange to see -2, as that would imply the existence of $\text{P(w|t)} \approx 0$ and $\sqrt{ \text{P(t)} } \approx 1$. To check that this is behavior is not in-line with the null hypothesis, we can do a random shuffle of our vectors entrees. Doing this, you can confirm for yourself that the null hypothesis gives us a gaussian centered around zero. We also observe that $\sum_{i} \text{P(w}_{i})\langle\vec{\text{w}_{i}},\hat{\text{t}}\rangle$ is indeed zero, and that our null case where we randomly shuffle $P(w_{i})$ does not share the same property.

The same applies to a random unit vector. Because we don't know P(t), its not plausible for us to compute our score function directly, however, since all we care about is finding the solution with maximum score, our goal is to find a score function that depends on the weights we find with out dot product that is monotonically related to our original score function.

Now we know the shape of our GLoVe vectors, lets figure out how to approximate our score function with them. First, things first however, let us simplify our score function:

log is monotonic so we can instead solve for when log(P(solution)) is maximized.

$$\log(\text{P(solution)}) = \sum_{G \in S} \log(\text{P(G)})$$
$$\log(\text{P(G)}) = \log\left( \sum_{t} \exp(\log(\text{P(G,t)})) \right)$$
This can be approximated as the max over topics of $\log\left(\text{P(G,topic)}\right)$ now onto approximating 
$$\begin{aligned}

\log(\text{P(G,t)}) &= \log(\text{Norm(t)})+\sum \log(\text{P(w|t)}) + \sum \log(\text{1-P(w*|t)}) + \log(\text{P(t)})\\
&\approx \log(\text{Norm(t)})+\sum \log(\text{P(w|t)}) - \sum \log(\text{1-P(w*|t)}) + \log(\text{P(t)})
\end{aligned}
$$
and we can approximate $\log(\text{Norm(t)})$ as $-\log(\max_{\text{groups}}(P_{N}(G|t)))$ giving us that
$$\begin{aligned}
S^*(G,t)) &= \sum \log(\text{P(w|t)}) - \sum \log(\text{1-P(w*|t)}) \\
\log(P(G,t)) &= -\max_{\text{groups}}(S^*(G,t)) + S^*(G,t)
\end{aligned} 
$$ensuring that all values of $\log(P(G,t)) \leq 0$ 

experimental setup ideas: 
we flash a word at someone, and ask them to name the first word that comes to mind
